Deepr

Autonomous Learning and Knowledge Infrastructure

1. Overview

Deepr is a system for structured learning, reasoning, and improvement.
It transforms the act of asking a question into a repeatable process of discovery, analysis, and documentation.
Unlike chat interfaces that respond in isolation, Deepr builds knowledge that can be verified, extended, and reused by both humans and intelligent agents.

A Deepr session produces durable artifacts: versioned Markdown reports, data indexes, and analytical context.
These artifacts serve as building blocks for Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) systems, Model Context Protocol (MCP) agents, and human researchers who need traceable understanding rather than transient answers.

Deepr operates locally. You own the data, context, cost, and history.
It integrates with multiple AI providers (OpenAI, Gemini, xAI Grok, Azure, and others) through a single consistent workflow.
It is designed for autonomy, transparency, and continuous improvement.

Core ideas

Governed workflow – research, learn, and analyze in a structured loop

Durable knowledge – outputs that can be versioned, cited, and reused

Multi-provider – balance depth, cost, and reasoning style without changing your workflow

Human and agent compatible – run locally, via web UI, or through MCP as an agent capability

Continuous learning – Deepr uses itself to evaluate and enhance its own performance

2. Why Deepr

Deepr provides the missing layer between reasoning and memory.
Large models generate, but they forget.
Deepr captures, organizes, and governs what they learn so that knowledge compounds rather than disappears.

It is built for three intertwined purposes:

Learning for humans – rapidly build understanding of complex subjects through reproducible research.

Learning for agents – enable AI systems to acquire, store, and reuse expertise over time.

Learning for organizations – create institutional memory built from verified, cited, and current knowledge.

Deepr is not a wrapper. It is a research and learning operating system.
It coordinates providers, manages context, stores knowledge, and makes reasoning transparent.

3. Core Concepts
Concept	Description
Artifact	A cited, versioned Markdown document produced by each run.
Workflow	The plan–search–analyze–synthesize loop that defines all Deepr tasks.
Provider	Any reasoning engine that executes parts of the workflow (OpenAI, Gemini, Grok, Azure, etc.).
Mode	The structure of a run (focus, docs, project, team).
Context store	Local semantic index for documents, transcripts, or prior results.
Budget	Cost guardrail ensuring transparent and controlled API spending.
Vector store	Persistent embedding index used by both humans and agents for retrieval.
MCP integration	Interface that exposes Deepr as a reasoning service to external agents.

Each element is modular and transparent. Together they create a governed learning loop that converges on understanding instead of endless generation.

4. Quick Start

Deepr is designed to get you from curiosity to structured insight in minutes.
It installs like a standard Python CLI tool and runs locally on macOS, Linux, and Windows.

Installation
git clone https://github.com/yourusername/deepr.git
cd deepr
pip install -e .
deepr --version


You now have the deepr command available system-wide.

Configure Providers

Copy the example configuration and add your API keys.

cp .env.example .env


Open .env in a text editor and insert one or more keys:

OPENAI_API_KEY=sk-...
GEMINI_API_KEY=...
XAI_API_KEY=...
AZURE_OPENAI_API_KEY=...


You can add additional provider keys later without changing your workflow.

Set a Monthly Budget

Deepr tracks costs automatically. Setting a budget protects against runaway usage.

deepr budget set 25
deepr budget status

Run Your First Job
deepr run focus "Current research directions in embodied AI"


Within minutes you will receive a cited Markdown report that includes sources, summaries, and recommendations.
Results are stored locally for reuse or integration into downstream systems.

5. Modes of Operation

Deepr supports four primary modes that together cover almost every research or learning workflow.

Mode	Purpose	Example
Focus	Single topic research. Produces compact cited reports.	deepr run focus "Frontier methods for AI alignment"
Docs	Generates living documentation for APIs, frameworks, and tools.	deepr run docs "Gemini API pricing, quotas, and usage guide"
Project	Multi-phase exploration where each phase informs the next.	deepr run project "How small labs can build sustainable AI infrastructure"
Team	Creates a virtual think-tank of complementary perspectives.	deepr run team "Ethical frameworks for autonomous learning systems"
How It Works

Focus mode is ideal for targeted analysis or fact-finding.

Docs mode transforms Deepr into a documentation engine that emphasizes freshness, limits, and examples.

Project mode manages long-form, context-linked investigations that may last hours or days.

Team mode creates multiple reasoning agents, each with a distinct role such as analyst, skeptic, or architect. Their outputs are synthesized into a balanced expert-level report.

6. Key Features
Multi-Provider Research

Deepr treats models as interchangeable engines.
You can switch providers or combine them in a single workflow.

deepr run focus "Hybrid search and reasoning architectures" --provider gemini
deepr run focus "Open source governance models" --provider openai -m o3-deep-research
deepr run focus "Autonomous system design" --provider grok


Available Providers

Provider	Example Models	Ideal Use
OpenAI	o3, o4-mini	Deep research, planning, synthesis
Google Gemini	2.5-flash, 2.5-pro	Structured reasoning, large context
xAI Grok	grok-4, grok-4-fast	Real-time search, agentic workflows
Azure OpenAI	o3, o4-mini	Enterprise deployments, compliance
Document Integration

You can upload reference material to ground the research in your own data.

deepr run focus "Identify technical risks in the proposed system" \
  --upload architecture.pdf --upload requirements.md


Deepr will semantically index your files and use them as context during analysis.

Vector Stores and Reuse

Artifacts can be indexed and queried later.

deepr vector create --name "research" --files reports/*.md
deepr run focus "Summarize prior findings on AI safety debates" --vector-store research


These stores serve both humans and connected agents through MCP or RAG systems.

Prompt Refinement

Deepr can automatically optimize vague prompts into structured research instructions.

echo "DEEPR_AUTO_REFINE=true" >> .env
deepr run focus "compare reinforcement learning strategies"


The system adds clarity, structure, and current context before submission.

Budgets, Analytics, and Governance
deepr budget status
deepr analytics report
deepr cost summary


Every run is logged with cost, provider, and model metrics.
Transparency is a design requirement, not an afterthought.

7. Architecture

Deepr organizes learning as a reproducible workflow.

Query
  ↓
Refinement
  ↓
Planner
  ↓
Execution
  ↓
Synthesis
  ↓
Cited Artifact

Components
Component	Description
Planner	Decomposes the user’s query into a sequence of tasks.
Executor	Dispatches subtasks to providers, respecting budgets and priorities.
Synthesizer	Aggregates results, extracts key insights, and writes structured Markdown.
Storage Layer	Local SQLite queue plus file system for artifacts and vector data.
Interface Layer	CLI, local web UI, and optional MCP endpoint for connected agents.
Principles

Local first: no remote database or telemetry.

Provider agnostic: any reasoning API can be plugged in.

Transparent by design: every step leaves traceable artifacts.

Auditable cost and time budgets.

Deterministic workflows where identical inputs yield identical outputs.

8. Integration with Agents and Knowledge Systems
For Agentic Systems

Deepr can serve as an external reasoning and learning capability for AI agents. Through the Model Context Protocol (MCP), Deepr exposes endpoints that agents can call to perform structured learning tasks.

Agents can:

Request Deepr to perform deep research or document synthesis on a topic.

Retrieve cited, versioned artifacts.

Use those artifacts as memory for future reasoning cycles.

This creates a recursive improvement loop where the agent’s world model grows with verified knowledge rather than transient responses.

For RAG Systems

Retrieval-Augmented Generation pipelines can embed Deepr outputs into their retrieval layer.

Workflow Example:

Deepr generates a Markdown report with citations and context.

The RAG pipeline ingests that report into its vector store.

Future queries retrieve the Deepr-generated sections, providing grounded context to the model.

This turns Deepr into a knowledge feeder for long-term memory systems.

Integration Example
deepr run project "Developments in multimodal transformers"
deepr vector create --name "ml-knowledge" --files artifacts/*.md


Then connect your RAG system to ml-knowledge as a retrievable data source.
Each new Deepr run expands the context base, keeping the agent up to date.

9. Advanced Examples
Example 1: Strategic Analysis
deepr run project "What strategies are emerging for aligning open-source AI models?"


Result:

Overview of current alignment methods in open-weight ecosystems.

Comparative analysis of community-led versus corporate governance models.

Practical recommendations for small teams seeking alignment frameworks.

Fully cited, reusable artifact.

Example 2: Technical Documentation
deepr run docs "Gemini API quotas, authentication, and example calls"


Result:

Schema of endpoints, authentication flow, and code examples.

Comparison between Flash and Pro models.

Integration snippets for Python and Node.js.

Markdown output ready for RAG ingestion or sharing.

Example 3: Think Tank Collaboration
deepr run team "How can agentic systems coordinate for shared goals?"


Result:

Independent perspectives (coordinator, ethicist, systems engineer, experimentalist).

Cross-analysis of tradeoffs between autonomy and control.

Synthesized recommendations and open research questions.

Example 4: Self-Improving Loop
deepr run project "Evaluate Deepr’s prompt optimization and suggest improvements"


Deepr uses itself to test new methods, compare outputs, and identify weak points.
This recursive loop improves the framework over time.

10. Cost and Quality Profiles
Depth	Cost	Time	Output
Quick insight	$1–2	5–10 min	Focused summary with citations
Comprehensive report	$2–5	15–30 min	Structured analysis
Multi-phase study	$5–15	45–90 min	Context-linked investigation
Expert-level synthesis	$10–20	1–2 hrs	Cited, publication-grade artifact

Every cost is governed by your budget file.
Deepr logs token counts and execution time for transparency.

11. Vision

Deepr is built on the principle that learning and reasoning should be transparent, repeatable, and self-improving.
It aims to become a foundation for continuous expertise acquisition.

Goals

Enable systems that can learn autonomously from current information.

Provide humans with tools for deep, trustworthy research.

Connect models, data, and context into a single learning network.

Toward Autonomous Expertise

Deepr evolves along five capability levels:

Level	Description	Status
1	Reactive execution	Complete
2	Procedural automation	Complete
3	Adaptive planning	In production
4	Reflective optimization	Target for next release
5	Autonomous expertise acquisition	Vision goal

At Level 5, Deepr and connected agents will identify gaps in knowledge, design their own research plans, and continuously update their understanding.

12. Design Philosophy

Context before automation – Accuracy begins with relevance.

Quality before quantity – A single verified insight is more valuable than hundreds of guesses.

Transparency over confidence – Every claim includes traceable evidence.

Local-first, provider-agnostic – Ownership of data and flexibility of execution.

Learning that converges – Each iteration builds on the last, forming real expertise.

13. Interfaces

CLI: Core interface for developers and researchers.

Local Web UI: Launch with python -m deepr.api.app for a visual interface.

MCP Server: Use deepr mcp serve to enable integration with tools like Claude Desktop, Cursor, or Windsurf.

Programmatic API: Planned for integration into enterprise and agentic systems.

All interfaces share the same local queue, storage, and governance features.

14. Documentation and Resources

INSTALL.md
 – Full installation and troubleshooting.

FEATURES.md
 – Complete feature reference.

ROADMAP.md
 – Detailed development plans.

CHANGELOG.md
 – Version history and updates.

15. License and Credits

Deepr is released under the MIT License.
See LICENSE
 for full details.

Created by Nick Seal to explore scalable, transparent learning for humans and intelligent systems.

16. Closing Philosophy

Knowledge is power. Automation through large language models, agents, and infrastructure as code allows humans and machines to operate at scales that were not possible before. Deepr enables both users and intelligent systems to learn, adapt, and reason at scale, creating a flywheel of insight, understanding, and progress. When knowledge becomes structured and shareable, it accelerates discovery across every domain. If Deepr is built well, it or systems like it will help humans work with the precision and reach of superintelligence while giving AI systems the grounding they need to approach general intelligence. The boundary between idea and reality is becoming thinner. Deepr exists to amplify knowledge with insight, clarity, and compassion as humans and AI learn together.



